[WIP] Tutorial Ch 3: Expand box-model to handle multiple grid cells with one call to MICM solver (#509)
NCAR/musica: docs/source/tutorials/chapter3.rst

.. _chapter3:

Chapter 3
=========

MICM Box Model with Multiple Grid Cells in Fortran
--------------------------------------------------

In this third MUSICA Fortran example,
we will extend the MICM box model from Chapter 2 to handle multiple grid cells
in a single call to the MICM solver.
This demonstrates how MUSICA can efficiently solve chemical mechanisms
for multiple independent air masses simultaneously.

Each grid cell represents an independent set of well-mixed air masses,

> allowing us to model different atmospheric conditions (temperature, pressure, initial concentrations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allowing us to model different atmospheric conditions (temperature, pressure, concentrations)
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed

    :language: f90

Key differences from the single grid cell example in Chapter 2:

**Grid Cell Configuration:**

- ``num_grid_cells`` is set to 3 instead of 1
- Each grid cell can have different environmental conditions (temperature, pressure)
- Each grid cell can start with different initial concentrations

**State Management:**

The ``state`` object now manages data for multiple grid cells using strides:

- ``state%species_strides%variable`` provides the stride for accessing species data across cells
- ``state%rate_parameters_strides%variable`` provides the stride for rate parameter data
- Concentrations are stored in a flat array with stride-based indexing

**Setting Conditions and Initial Values:**

.. code-block:: fortran

  ! Different temperatures for each cell
  do cell_id = 1, num_grid_cells
    state%conditions(cell_id)%temperature = 273.0 + (cell_id - 1) * 10.0
    state%conditions(cell_id)%pressure    = 1.0e5
    state%conditions(cell_id)%air_density = state%conditions(cell_id)%pressure / &
                                           (GAS_CONSTANT * state%conditions(cell_id)%temperature)
  end do

**Accessing Multi-Cell Data:**

> To access concentration data for a specific species in a specific grid cell:

Reviewer: Indicate that the indexing return is 0-basd, so we must subtract 1

Reviewer 2: I added the following sentence. Could you review it?

```Markdown
Fortran's 1-based indexing requires subtracting 1 from the 0-based ``cell_id``
and ``species_index`` to adjust offsets.
```

.. code-block:: fortran

  cell_stride = state%species_strides%grid_cell
  var_stride = state%species_strides%variable
  cell_concentration = state%concentrations(1 + (cell_id - 1) * cell_stride + (species_index - 1) * var_stride)

**Simultaneous Solving:**

> The key advantage is that a single call to ``micm%solve`` processes all grid cells:
> 
> .. code-block:: fortran
> 
>   call micm%solve(time_step, state, solver_state, solver_stats, error)
> 
> This is much more efficient than calling the solver separately for each grid cell,
> especially when dealing with large numbers of atmospheric grid cells in climate or weather models.
> 
> To build and run the example, follow the same build instructions as in Chapter 1 and 2.
> The compilation command would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A call to ``micm%solve`` with a state that represents multiple grid cells is only required once per time step; all grid cells are solved simultaneously in a multi-grid cell micm state.

.. code-block:: fortran

  call micm%solve(time_step, state, solver_state, solver_stats, error)

This is much more efficient than calling the solver separately for each grid cell,
especially when dealing with large numbers of atmospheric grid cells in climate or weather models.

To build and run the example, follow the same build instructions as in Chapter 1 and 2.
The compilation command would be:
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed

    0.191   0.734   0.335   0.558   0.575   0.607

 Solver completed successfully for all           3 grid cells!
  $

**Analysis of Results:**

Notice how each grid cell evolves differently:

- **Grid Cell 1** (273K): Starting with concentrations of 1.0, the cooler temperature leads to slower reaction rates
- **Grid Cell 2** (283K): Starting with higher concentrations (2.0), shows proportionally similar evolution patterns but at roughly double the scale
- **Grid Cell 3** (293K): Starting with lower concentrations (0.5), the warmer temperature leads to faster reaction rates but proportionally similar patterns

The chemical mechanism responds to both the initial concentrations and the temperature conditions.
You can observe that Grid Cell 2, which starts with twice the concentration of Grid Cell 1, 
maintains roughly twice the final concentrations, demonstrating the linear scaling behavior of the system.
Meanwhile, the different temperatures lead to slightly different reaction efficiencies across the cells.

This multiple grid cell approach is essential for atmospheric modeling applications
where hundreds or thousands of grid cells need to be processed simultaneously

> while maintaining computational efficiency.

Reviewer 2: Hi @mattldawson, @K20shores, should we remove this paragraph or keep it? The values are fabricated, so the analysis is not meaningful, but I don't know. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Great, I added it
